---
title: "CS-118-02 Week 10"
author: "Varun Narravula"
date: 2022-04-04
---

## Shift vs. Rotate vs. Arithmetic Shift

_I have no idea why this was gone over, but I'm including it anyway._

You've done bitwise shifts before in C and C++ using `<<` and `>>`. In assembly,
their equivalents are `shl` (_shift left_) and `shr` (_shift right_). `rax >> 1`
If you want to perform the equivalent of `$ax << 2` in assembly, you would write
`shl ax, 2`; if you wanted to shift right by 2, then you do `shr ax, 2`.

However, what about rotating? Rotating is a bit like shifting, except that if
any values go off the sides on a shift, they will be wrapped onto the other
side. If you rotate a number `0b00001011` right by 1, then it would result in
`0b10000101`, where the 1 that got shifted got put back on the other side
instead of getting discarded.

Another instruction that looks similar to the normal shifts is `sal` (_shift
arithmetic right_) and `sar` (_shift arithmetic left_). What does this do?
Normal shift instructions only work on unsigned values, and they ignore the sign
bit if the number is stored in two's complement notation. Arithmetic shifts like
these will make sure to preserve the sign (this is called sign extension, and is
seen in instructions like `movsx` that have the same behavior).

## `test` vs. `cmp`

There is another instruction called `test`, which works similarly to `cmp`.
However, it performs a bitwise `and` (i.e. `test eax, eax` would compute
`and eax, eax`) instead of subtracting (i.e. `cmp, eax, 0` would compute
`sub eax, 0`) and set flags depending on the result. You can use this to compare
as well and jump based on flags set based on those comparisons.

## Intrinsics

What are intrinsics? You already know how SSE can make things much more
efficient because it is a SIMD instruction set. However, it's extremely
difficult to do this using assembly; most people use intrinsics instead. It is
the same instruction set, but it uses C, which is much easier than assembly
because of the access to much more robust C tooling. Intel provides an SDK that
interfaces with SSE instructions and looks similar to actual assembly code; all
you need to do is include a single header. There is no need to deal with
compliated compile instructions anymore; all you need is a C compiler and the
`-msse4` flag in your compile command.

Every SSE instruction has a corresponding C function that is described on
[Intel's website](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/docs/intrinsics-guide/index.html)
with comprehensive documentation on what parameters it takes, what architectures
and microcode and chipsets it is supported by, and other things. To look it up,
you can type whatever instruction or method you need in the search bar and it
will give you a description of what the function does, its corresponding
assembly mnemonic, as well as a few other things such as the parameters it can
take. You can select from a few different instruction sets, like AVX and
whatnot, but don't worry about these for now. Refer to Intel's assembly guide if
you don't know what to search for.

Raw link:
[https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/docs/intrinsics-guide/index.html]

## Standard Deviation Using Intrinsics

A standard deviation, if you do not know what it is from statistics, is a
description of the amount of difference from an average for a given dataset. The
mathematical formula for calculating standard deviation is this:

$$ \sigma = \sqrt{\frac{\sum{(x_i - \mu)}^2}{N}} $$

Where:

- $\sigma$ = standard deviation
- $N$ = size of dataset
- $x_i$ = each value from the dataset
- $\mu$ = mean of dataset

In English, this is the square root of the sum of squared differences from the
mean divided by the size of the data set.

This isn't a math class, what does this have to do with assembly? Well, it has
nothing directly, but calculating the standard deviation using SSE is a good
example of why using intrinsics can be much simpler than using straight
assembly.

Given an dataset of numbers (say an array of type float), how would you
calculate the standard deviation of it using intrinsics? The solution is here
(try it yourself first!):

```c
float sum(float *array, size_t size) {
  __m128 accumulator = _mm_setzero_ps();
  size_t i = 0;

  for (; i < ((size) & ~((4) - 1)); i += 4) {
    accumulator = _mm_add_ps(accumulator, _mm_loadu_ps(array + i));
  }

  accumulator = _mm_hadd_ps(accumulator, accumulator);
  accumulator = _mm_hadd_ps(accumulator, accumulator);

  for (; i < size; i++) {
    accumulator = _mm_add_ss(accumulator, _mm_load_ss(array + i));
  }

  return _mm_cvtss_f32(accumulator);
}

float standard_deviation(float *array, size_t size) {
  float average = sum(array, size) / size;
  const __m128 diff = _mm_set1_ps(average);

  __m128 accumulator = _mm_setzero_ps();
  size_t i = 0;

  for (; i < ((size) & ~((4) - 1)); i += 4) {
    __m128 sub = _mm_sub_ps(_mm_loadu_ps(array + i), diff);
    accumulator = _mm_add_ps(accumulator, _mm_mul_ps(sub, sub));
  };

  accumulator = _mm_hadd_ps(accumulator, accumulator);
  accumulator = _mm_hadd_ps(accumulator, accumulator);

  float deviations = _mm_cvtss_f32(accumulator);

  for (; i < size; i++) {
    float sub = array[i] - average;
    deviations += sub * sub;
  }

  return sqrt(deviations / size); // #include <math.h>
}
```

I separated out the `sum` function to make it easier to read and less of a
monolith. But hold on, what are all those underscores? And where's the assembly?
All of these functions can be used by including specific header files that are
described in Intel's intrinsics documentation from above. Some of them have
slightly different names, but roughly speaking, here are the instructions used
and what they correspond to (if they have a corresponding instruction):

- `_mm_setzero_ps` :: `xorps <reg>, <reg>` (Clears a register to zeros)
- `_mm_loadu_ps` :: `movups`
- `_mm_load_ss` :: `movss`
- `_mm_set1_ps` :: **_intrinsics-unique_** (Broadcast 32-bit float to all parts
  of xmm register)
- `_mm_add_ps` :: `addps`
- `_mm_add_ss` :: `addss`
- `_mm_hadd_ps` :: `haddps`
- `_mm_sub_ps` :: `subps`
- `_mm_mul_ps` :: `mulps`
- `_mm_cvtss_f32` :: `movss <m32>, <xmm>` (Moves lower word of xmm register to
  location)

You'll notice that there are some extra convenience functions included in the
intrinsics that Intel provides that are extremely useful. `set1_ps` is much more
intuitive than `movss` and shuffling a value around, and `setzero_ps` is
explicit in what it does, unlike `xorps <reg> <reg>`. Right away, you see that
intrinsics can be more readable than straight assembly, despite the underscores.

Another great advantage to this is that you do not have to take into account the
fact that only `xmm0`-`xmm15` exists. You can now assign however many registers
you need, and the compiler will do some magic to only use the 16 registers the
CPU has! Now you don't have to take into account yet another limit that straight
assembly places on you.

Well, how does this work? Essentially, it sums the array using an external
counter in `sum`. To sum up the remaining <4 elements, instead of attempting to
push it into another SSE register (that would cause a segfault), you would
normally loop over it using the same external counter for the rest of the array.
`xmm` registers are now of a type `__m128` (aka 128-bit register), and you can
bind them to C variables. Here, an accumulator register is used to sum up the
values using SSE, and then it is horizontally summed twice with itself to get
the result of the SSE summations. In the `sum` function, `addss` is used to add
scalars to the bottom dword of the register (now all other parts of the register
are ignored). This is then extracted as a float in the return value using
`_mm_cvtss_f32`.

For the part that calculates the standard deviation, it is similar. It
calculates the average using the `sum` function (this is $\mu$ in the standard
deviation equation), broadcasts (fills) this average into all the `f32` slots in
another register so that it can simultaneously take differences using SSE. The
loop logic is the same, where it sums up the differences from the mean using
this register and an accumulator, and horizontally adds this accumulator with
itself twice to sum it all up. Then it gets the remaining deviations from the
mean; now you have the value of $\sum{(x_i - \mu)}^2$. I included `<math.h>` and
got the square root with it, because I exracted the deviations and used a normal
C loop without intrinsics for the last part unlike what I used in `sum` with the
scalar instructions, but it should work either way. Try not to copy the example
though, then you won't learn anything.

And there you go! You can now pass in an array of floats of any size, and you
should be able to calculate the standard deviation from it. That's all for the
notes for this week, the prof didn't go into depth about much of anything.
